# Project: "Wine yeast community assembly: effects of regionality, agricultural management, and fermentative conditions on their composition and transcriptional regulation".

ABSTRACT

The grape's microbiome plays a pivotal role in determining the sensory and chemical characteristics of wine. Selectively using strains adapted to the grape must's physical-chemical environment and local fungal microbiome helps in achieving the desired wine qualities. Yeast sugar metabolism also produces volatile compounds, apart from ethanol and carbon dioxide, that contribute to the final wine profile. Hence, understanding and manipulating the grape microbiome can help in improving wine production by generating wines with unique flavours and aromas. Our research evaluates the impact of geographical origin, farming practices, and fermentation conditions on the fungal communities found in grape must samples. To analyse these effects more comprehensively, we created a detailed pipeline that combines the processing of ITS amplicon-seq and RNA-seq data, along with ecological, biological, and statistical analyses. This approach provides valuable insights into optimising fermentation processes, resulting in wines with specific qualities. Our findings indicate that the origin and farming practices significantly influence yeast composition, with certain genera like Saccharomyces, Hanseniaspora, and Lachancea dominating these communities, eventually affecting gene expression and metabolite production during wine fermentation. Besides, we described how fermentative conditions affected Saccharomyces transcriptional profile, and thus, wine composition.
